> In the last section, I tried to articulate my interest in functional
> programming and my reasons for working on this project.
>
> In this section, I will try to give you a reader some reasons to
> continue to read these pages.

### Why Would You Read These? {#why-would-i-read-these}

* * * * *

In my experience, writing software is fun. For a while at least.

Before I write a software, I think about the design. I would think how to represent data and how to manipulate them. Then I start to write the code and I'm excited. It's fun. I'm transforming my ideas into a working program!

Very soon, though, I start to notice that not everything works well. I must handle exceptions, null checks and to deal with another problems not related to my design ideas. I find myself solving problems related to underlying computer and programming language.

As the software grows it starts to resemble a monster. My beautiful design is scattered around null checks, buried inside nested try-catch blocks. Every time I add something new, the program breaks in five places. Everything seems to be connected, dependent. Complexity grows exponentially and my capability to reason about the program degrades. It's just so many things to keep in mind. It is not fun any more! It's rather hard and mundane.

At that point, I'm ready to give up.


#### Why is this happening? {#why-this-happened}

* * * * *

Well, in imperative programming languages, the methods are too powerful with no constraints. They can do whatever they want. They can change objects in place, write to a file, put something on a screen. They are liars too. For example, consider some `write(file)` method. She says she will write to a file. But instead she could throw 4 different exceptions. There are methods which say they do something and return a result. But they can do something else in the process and hide that fact
from the programmer.

> Metaphorically it is similar to a situation when one gets a powerful
> car which allows him to drive anywhere. The car can drive through
> fields for example. One could try to reach a destination by driving
> straight line path. It looks like a great idea in the beginning until
> one ends up in a ditch with no way out.


#### Is there an alternative? {#whats-the-alternative}

* * * * *

Functional Programming of course :-) !

Functional programming is the programming with functions, not methods. Functions are much less powerful. They follow constraints. In exchange though, they have various very useful properties which make reasoning about them straight forward. Functions do what they say they do and never lie. They don't throw exceptions or return nulls.

Functions are associative, pluggable and composable, the same way the `Lego` blocks are. One can build a software by composing simple functions the same way as one would build a house from Lego blocks. The software complexity doesn't grow exponentially neither. Instead, a program is just a function composed of another functions. The capability to reason about the software stays constant.

Also, the solution space is smaller. One just need to learn a few ideas and how to compose them together. There are design patterns in functional programming of course, but there is not 40 of them.

> It is like to have a car capable of driving on the roads only. One has
> much less power at the beginning, but one will safely reach the
> destination following the roads.

These methaphores were quoted from [Functional Programming is
Terrible](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hzf3hTUKk8U&list=PLWLFcD9reEAqTBKnEPBD4hrN1kLi0xhb3&index=10)
talk presented by Runar Bjarnason.

* * * * *
