> In the last section, I made a suggestion that there is a way to have fun while creating a software. I claimed that functional programming gives us a better way to design a software and reason about it.

> In the following sections, I will discuss the functional programming definition in comparison to imperative programming paradigm.

### What is Functional Programming?


#### Imperative Programming Paradigm
* * * * *

Imperative programming uses statements that change the program's state. We construct programs with programming language commands and which describe how the program operates. Our programs basically tell the compiler (interpreter) how to accomplish desired results step by step.

With the addition to statements, we use subroutines call procedures or functions to modularize imperative programs. Imperative programming with procedures is called **procedural programming**. Procedures have no properties or restrictions defined, for example, they may or may not take arguments and may or may not return a result value. They may modify the state of the program or crash with an error.

What imperative programs do:

- They modify mutable variables with assignments.
- They use control structures such as loop, break, continue, if-else statements.
- They use procedures with no restrictions on their properties.

**Example:**

```scala
var numbers = List(1,2,3,4,5)
var sum = 0
do {
    sum += numbers.head
    numbers = numbers.tail
  } while (numbers != Nil)

//Result:
numbers: List[Int] = List()
sum: Int = 15
```

In the example above the program calculates the sum of numbers from 1 to 5. Variables `numbers` and `sum` represent the mutable state which is modified in the `do while loop` control structure. After the program executes the list `numbers` is empty and `sum` is 15.

#### Functional Programming Paradigm
* * * * *

Functional programming is a programming style where the fundamental application is the application of pure functions to arguments. Functional programs are composed of functions.

What functional programs do:

- They transform immutable values to other values.
- They use functions and function compositions as control structures.
- They use pure referentially transparent functions.

**Example:**

```scala
var numbers = List(1,2,3,4,5)
  
def sumOfNumbers(numbers: List[Int]): Int = numbers match {
  case Nil => 0
  case head :: tail => head + sumOfNumbers(tail)
}
  
val sum = sumOfNumbers(numbers)

//Result:
numbers: List[Int] = List(1, 2, 3, 4, 5)
sumOfNumbers: (numbers: List[Int])Int
sum: Int = 15
```

In the example above the program calculates the sum of numbers from 1 to 5 with the usage of pure function `sumOfNumbers`. This is a function which takes a `List[Int]` and returns `Int`. The `sumOfNumbers` is defined in terms of its argument `List[Int]` as follows:
1. If the function receives empty list `Nil` it returns 0.
2. If the function receives a list of one or more elements it adds the first element `head` to the recursive call to itself with the new list `tail`.  The 'tail' just original list without `head`. Note that `head :: Nil` would match list with one .

The function application `sumOfNumbers(numbers)` will in effect build following call stack:
```scala
(1 + sumOfNumbers(List(2,3,4,5))
(1 + (2 + sumOfNumbers(List(3,4,5)))
(1 + (2 + (3 + sumOfNumbers(List(4,5))))
(1 + (2 + (3 + sumOfNumbers(List(4,5))))
(1 + (2 + (3 + (4 + sumOfNumbers(List(5)))))
(1 + (2 + (3 + (4 + (5 + sumOfNumbers(Nil))))))
(1 + (2 + (3 + (4 + (5 + 0)))))
```
And when it folds it returns 15. Notice that we did not define any mutable variables anywhere in the program. Everything is immutable value `val` and cannot be changed. All we do is to transform a list of numbers to its sum without changing anything.
* * * * *