> In the last section, we discussed the higher order functions and saw an example of a tail recursive function defined inside another function.

> In this section, We will continue to talk about the function applications, namely currying and partially applied functions.

### Curried and Partialy applied functions.
* * * * *

#### Arity of Functions and Currying

**Arity** of a function refers to the number of argumemts a function takes or a in mathematical definition it is *the dimension of domain in the coresponding cartesian product*. Let's look at an example:
```scala
def five() = 5;
def addFive(a: Int): Int = a + five()
def addFivePlusB(a: Int, b: Int): Int = addFive(a) + b
def addFivePlusBminusC(a: Int, b: Int, c: Int): Int = addFivePlusB(a,b) - c

val result = addFivePlusBminusC(1, 2, 3)

//Result
five: ()Int
addFive: (a: Int)Int
addFivePlusB: (a: Int, b: Int)Int
addFivePlusBminusC: (a: Int, b: Int, c: Int)Int
result: Int = 5
```

- Function `five` has a type of `() -> Int`, which means that it takes no argument and returns an `Int`, which means `five` is a function of *arity-0*. Functions of arity-0 are called the *nullary* functions. Nullary functions are used to express the side effects in imperative programming. In our case we get an `Int` from "nothing" similarly to `console.read()` function which would get a `String` from "nothing".
- Function `addFive` has a type of `Int -> Int` and therefore *arity-1* and is called the *unary* function.
- Function `addFivePlusB` has a type `(Int, Int) -> Int` and therefore *arity-2* and is called the *binary* function.
- Function `addFivePlusBminusC` has a type `(Int, Int, Int) -> Int` and so it is a function of *arity-3* called *ternary* function.

This can in analogy continue further and Scala supports functions up to arity-22, but in reality functions with higher arity than 3 are really rare in programming.

The interesting property of functions with arity-n where n > 1 is that they can be always transformed to the functions with arity-1. We can say in confidence that every function actually is an unary function. The technique of transforming a function of higher arity to unary function is called **currying**. For example the function `(Int, Int) -> Int` is the same function as `Int -> (Int -> Int)`.

Let's see an example to understand this concept better:
```scala
def add(a: Int, b: Int): Int = a + b
def add1(a: Int)(b: Int): Int = a + b
  
val areTheSame = add(5, 5) == add1(5)(5)
val addFive: Int => Int = add1(5)
val ten = addFive(5)

//Result:
add: (a: Int, b: Int)Int
add1: (a: Int)(b: Int)Int
areTheSame: Boolean = true
addFive: Int => Int = <function1>
ten: Int = 10
```
- The functions `add` and `add1` are the same functions. Function `add1` is *curried form* of `add`. The `add` type is `(Int, Int) -> Int` and `add1` type is `Int -> Int -> Int` which is the same as `Int -> (Int -> Int`) because the functions associate to left.
- `Int -> Int -> Int` is a function which takes a `Int` and returns a function `Int -> Int`, which we can see with `addFive` function. The `addFive` function is defined as application of `add1` to argument 5 and the result is `Int -> Int`
- The `addFive` function still requires an `Int` and will return an `Int` and we can see its application to argument 5 on line `val ten = addFive(5)`

Currying is so important concept in functional programming that most of the functional programming languages support currying by default. For example in Haskel or F# all functions are curried by default. Scala doesn't have this feature, but we can curry every function if needed by:
```scala
def add(a: Int, b: Int): Int = a + b
def addCurried = (add _).curried()     

//Result:
add: (a: Int, b: Int)Int
addCurried: Int => (Int => Int)
```
As we can see that the type of the function changed by currying from `(Int, Int) -> Int` to `Int => (Int => Int)`. We can also uncurry any unary higher order function with:
```scala
def addCurried(a: Int)(b: Int): Int = a + b     //> addCurried: (a: Int)(b: Int)Int
def addUncurried = Function.uncurried[Int, Int, Int](addCurried)

//Result:
addCurried: (a: Int)(b: Int)Int
addUncurried: (Int, Int) => Int
```
As we can see in the result, the `addUncurried` function has appropriate type `(Int, Int) -> Int)`. The expression `Function.uncurried[Int, Int, Int](addCurried)` is not pretty and in fact `uncurrying` is not idiomatic to Scala and used rarely.

#### Partialy Applied Functions

To partially apply a function is a similar concept to a function currying, where some of the arguments are supplied in the application and some are not:
```scala
def add(a: Int, b: Int): Int = a + b
  
def addFive(b: Int): Int = add(5, b)
def addSix = (b: Int) => add(6, b)
def addSeven = add(7, _: Int)

//Result:
add: (a: Int, b: Int)Int

addFive: (b: Int)Int
addSix: Int => Int
addSeven: Int => Int
```
- The unary functions `addFive`, `addSix` and `addSeven` all partially apply a different value to the first argument of binary `add` function. Each of unary functions uses a slightly different syntax to define the same type of partially applied function, which demonstrates the expressive power of Scala language.

**Note:**
> So far we discussed various properties of pure functions and their applications in the functional programming. I think we have a big enough arsenal to start to build simple pure functional programs. In the next section, we will see how to work with `List` type and what toolkit in the form of higher order functions it provides.
